This is the readme for Ortheus (v0.1) 12/4/2007 DD/MM/YY

Ortheus is a program for reconstructing the ancestral history of a set of sequences. 
It is able to infer a tree (or one may be provided) and then create a tree alignment
of the sequences that includes ML reconstructions of the ancestral sequences. Ortheus
is based upon a probabilistic transducer model and handles the evolution of both 
substitutions, insertions and deletions.

Ortheus was developed by Benedict Paten in the group of Ewan Birney at the EBI. You contact
me (Benedict) at bjp (AT) ebi (DOT) ac (DOT) uk.

The input is generally a set of sequences (in Fasta format) (and optionally a tree in 
Newick format), while the output is a multi-fasta alignment containing both the leaves 
and ancestor sequences, and a tree (if none was given initially).

To run Ortheus type python Ortheus.py [arguments] (after following the installation instructions). To see
the list of all possible arguments simply omit all arguments. The only mandatory
arguments are the list of sequence files (which must number greater than or equal
to two). If a tree is not specified then Ortheus will estimate a tree, using
neighbor joining, and place that estimated tree in a file. See 'ON TREE ESTIMATION' below.

INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS : 

Ortheus requires working installations of Java (v1.5 and higher), 
Python (v2.3 and higher), and a C compiler (GCC is assumed by default, to change
it edit the make file). Ortheus works with Pecan (a version of which is hidden
in the distribution) and therefore requires the installation of Exonerate 
(tested with version 1.0, but it may work with newer versions also, please let
me know). 

The simplest way to make Ortheus work is to ensure that the java, 
python and exonerate commands point to compatible versions of the programs.
If you need to specify these commands using non-standard keywords then please
see the command line arguments. To pass the exonerate command to Pecan it is 
necessary to use the extra Pecan arguments option in the Ortheus.py script
to pass the argument to Pecan.

As a simple example Ortheus might be called as follows..

Ortheus.py -e seq1.fa seq2.fa -m '~/bin/jre1.6.0/bin/java' -l '#-J exonerate-1.0.0'

Where the java and exonerate paths are specified explicitly using alternative keywords, and a 
tree is to be estimated. The output alignment would be in a file called 'output.mfa' and
the output tree (with branch lengths) would be in a file called 'output.newick'.

Another example including a tree..

python Ortheus.py -d '(0:0.1, 1:0.1);' -e seq1.fa seq2.fa

ON TREE ESTIMATION

As mentioned, Ortheus will attempt to estimate a tree is none is specified. This relies on using the Semphy program,
which must be installed and callable using the 'semphy' command. The strategy for tree building is pretty simple.

For given number of iterations, generate a random binary tree, and align sequences using Pecan. Take ungapped columns and 
feed to Semphy to do NJ with HKY model. Transition/transversion ratio = 2.0, 40% GC content. (You can easily hack the code 
to change these arguments, hint, look in estimateTree.py) Refine branch length estimations by calculating ratio of observed 
distances in ungapped columns of entire alignment vs. smaller sub-alignments where the branch lengths are lower, and less 
conservation bias is present. Finally (and optionally) root the binary tree by finding the mid-branch point in the tree which 
implies the fewest number of duplications (first sort term) and losses (second sort term, breaking ties when duplication number is even), when reconciled with a given species tree.

Example... 

Ortheus.py -b -e CAT_5k CHIMP_5k BABOON_5k RAT_5k -A cat chimp baboon rat -z '((((human, chimp), baboon),(mouse,rat)),(cat,dog));' 

The -A argument tells Ortheus what species each sequence comes from, and matches members of the species-tree leaf node set. 
This avoids the problem of having to match up fasta fields or sequence names with the labels in the species tree.

IMPORTANT : As with Pecan, the order of the sequence arguments must correspond with the left to right
order of the nodes in the tree. Pecan and Ortheus do not actually care about the names of the nodes in the
tree, just the ordering and its correspondence to the ordering of the sequence files. 

The source code is distributed for all of the code (though I don't claim it's readable), except 
for Pecan, which I will get round to releasing when I get a chance to make it a little less messy. 
What you can read is all open source etc., and where I have used other's code (i.e. the hash library etc) 
it should be pretty clear.